---
author:
  - Garrett J. Kepler
date: Updated
title: 'Lecture Notes on Combinatorics: Draft'
---

# Chapter 8: Probability, Graphs, & Ramsey Theory

## Probability Basics

You probably (pun-intended) have an idea of what probability is. We
experience this most every day of our lives. Thoughts like "I figure the
bus will be late today" or "I think I will pass this class" are both
simple examples of probabilistic thinking. *We are assigning an event
some chance of occurring*. We will now formalize this idea
mathematically.

\hfill
A _sample space_ $\Omega=\{\omega_1,\omega_2,\dots, \omega_n\}$ is a set
of events (outcomes, occurences, etc.). A _probability_
$\mathbb{P}:\Omega\to [0,1]$ is a function assigning elements of
$\Omega$ a number such that the following hold

1. $\mathbb{P}[\omega_i]\geq 0$ for all $i$
2. $\sum\limits_{i=1}^n\mathbb{P}[\omega_i]=1$

Intuitively, a sample space is simply a set and a probability is just a
function with special restrictions. Even more intuitively, a sample
space is a set of events and a probability is a likelihood those events
occur.  
Enough formalism, examples below.

\hfill
Let $\Omega=\{$heads, tails$\}$ and
$\mathbb{P}[$heads$]=\mathbb{P}[$tails$]=\frac{1}{2}$. Then, we have the
famed "fair coin toss". If you have not flipped a coin yet, please do.
Note that $\mathbb{P}[\omega_i]=\frac{1}{2}\geq 0$ for all $i$. Also,
$\sum\limits_{i=1}^n\mathbb{P}[\omega_i]=\mathbb{P}[\text{heads}]+\mathbb{P}[\text{tails}]=\frac{1}{2}+\frac{1}{2}=1$.
So, the $\mathbb{P}[\cdot]$ we have chosen is indeed a _probability_.

Let $\Omega=\{1,2,3,4,5,6\}$ and $\mathbb{P}[i]=\frac{1}{6}$ for all
$i\in \Omega$. Then, we have the "dice roll". Note that
$\mathbb{P}[\omega_i]=\frac{1}{6}\geq 0$ for all $i$. Also,
$\sum\limits_{i=1}^n\mathbb{P}[\omega_i]=\mathbb{P}[1]+\mathbb{P}[2]+\mathbb{P}[3]+\mathbb{P}[4]+\mathbb{P}[5]+\mathbb{P}[6]=\frac{1}{6}+\frac{1}{6}+\frac{1}{6}+\frac{1}{6}+\frac{1}{6}+\frac{1}{6}=1$.
So, the $\mathbb{P}[\cdot]$ we have chosen is again a _probability_.

A lot of the rules of combinatorics have probabilistic counterparts. For
example, the addition rule says that if sets $A$ and $B$ are disjoint
$(|A\cap B|=0)$, then $|A\cup B|=|A|+|B|$. Likewise, the following
holds.

- If $A$ and $B$ are *mutually exclusive* events (they cannot occur at
   the same time), then
   $\mathbb{P}[A\cup B]=\mathbb{P}[A]+\mathbb{P}[B]$.
- If $A_1,A_2,\dots,A_n$ are all mutually exclusive, then
   $\mathbb{P}\left[\bigcup\limits_{i=1}^nA_i\right]=\sum\limits_{i=1}^n\mathbb{P}[A_i]$.

Likewise, there is a product rule for probability:

- If $A$ and $B$ are *independent* events ($A$ has no impact on $B$),
   then $\mathbb{P}[A\cap B]=\mathbb{P}[A]\mathbb{P}[B]$.
- If $A_1,A_2,\dots,A_n$ are all independent, then
   $\mathbb{P}\left[\bigcap\limits_{i=1}^nA_i\right]=\prod\limits_{i=1}^n\mathbb{P}[A_i]$.

\hfill
Consider an urn with $n$ orbs labeled $\{1,2,\dots,n\}$. We will draw an
orb without looking and then putting it back.

1. Since there are $n$ orbs, the probability we draw any specific orb
   is $\frac{1}{n}$ ($\mathbb{P}[i\in \{1,2,\dots,n\}]=\frac{1}{n}$).
2. We are only drawing one orb at a time. So, drawing orb $j$ or orb
   $i$ are mutually exclusive (we cannot draw both at once). For
   example, seeing 2 or 3 are cannot happen at the same time. So,
   $\mathbb{P}[2\cup 3]=\mathbb{P}[2]+\mathbb{P}[3]=\frac{1}{n}+\frac{1}{n}=\frac{2}{n}$.
3. If we draw one orb, put it back, and draw again, then the event of
   seeing orb $j$ first has no impact on seeing orb $i$ second. So, the
   events are independent. For example, drawing 1 first has no impact
   on whether we draw 5 second. So,
   $\mathbb{P}[1\cap 5]=\mathbb{P}[1]\mathbb{P}[5]=\frac{1}{n}\cdot\frac{1}{n}=\frac{1}{n^2}$

This is the best case scenario. We do not have to care about overlap of
events. But, you might wonder what happens if events are not independent
or mutually exclusive? In general, we have the following:

\hfill
For two events $A$ and $B$, the probability of $A$ and $B$ happening
($\mathbb{P}[A\cap B]$) is the probability of $B$ happening
($\mathbb{P}[B]$) times the probability of $A$ happening *given that $B$
has already happened* ($\mathbb{P}[A|B]$). That is, $$\begin{aligned}
\mathbb{P}[A\cap B]=\mathbb{P}[A|B]\mathbb{P}[B]
\end{aligned}$$ We call $\mathbb{P}[A|B]$ a *conditional
probability* and we say "probability of $A$ given $B$".

Hopefully this seems rather intuitive: "$A$ *and* $B$ happening means
$B$ must have happened. Now given that $B$ has happened, consider $A$".
Note that the choice of $A$ and $B$ here is arbitrary. That is, we can
also say $\mathbb{P}[A\cap B]=\mathbb{P}[B|A]\mathbb{P}[A]$.

\hfill
Consider again the orb and urn problem with $n$ numbered orbs. We will
draw without looking. This time, we will not put the drawn orb back in
the urn. Consider drawing 2 and setting it to the side. Now, there are
only $n-1$ orbs in the urn. This affects the probability of drawing any
of the remaining orbs. Originally, $\mathbb{P}[i]=\frac{1}{n}$ for all
$i$ in the urn. Without 2, we have $\mathbb{P}[i]=\frac{1}{n-1}$ for all
$i$ in the urn.

Consider the second part of the definition of a probability:
$\sum\limits_{i=1}^n\mathbb{P}[\omega_i]=1$. What this is saying is that
the probability that _anything_ happens is 1. That is, there is a 100%
chance of something happening. Formally, we would say
$\mathbb{P}[\Omega]=1$ (the probability of our sample space is 1). This
leads to the following theorem.

- $\mathbb{P}[A]=1-\mathbb{P}[A^C]$ for all $A\in \Omega$
- $\mathbb{P}\left[\bigcup\limits_{i=1}^nA_i\right]=1-\mathbb{P}\left[\bigcap\limits_{i=1}^nA_i^C\right]$
   for $A_i\in \Omega$

\hfill
$\mathbb{P}[A]=\mathbb{P}[\Omega\textbackslash A^C]=1-\mathbb{P}[A^C]$
and then DeMorgan's laws to obtain second point.

We are now ready to define what is called a random variable. Much like a
variable in the traditional sense, a random variable is a placeholder
that takes on values from some set. A random variable differs from a
traditional variable since we also require that it takes *random* values
from $\Omega$ according to $\mathbb{P}$. Formally,

\hfill
A random variable $X:\Omega \to \mathbb{R}$ is a function that maps the
events in $\Omega$ equipped with the probability $\mathbb{P}[\cdot]$.

\hfill
The above definition may be scary but think about the following:

- Let $\Omega=\{$heads, tails$\}$ and $X:\Omega\to \Omega$ be the
   outcome of a coin toss.
- Let $\Omega=\{$heads, tails$\}$ and $X:\Omega\to \{0,1\}$ be the
   outcome of a coin toss where heads will be assigned 0 and tails will
   be assigned 1.
- Let $\Omega=\{$tilings of the $1\times n$ board with squares and
   dominoes$\}$ and $X:\Omega\to \{1,2,\dots,n\}$ be the length of a
   randomly draw board.

\hfill
The _expectation_ (expected value) of a random variable is defined as
$$\begin{aligned}
\mathbb{E}[X]=\sum_{x}x\cdot \mathbb{P}[X=x]
\end{aligned}$$

\hfill
Let $X$ be the outcome of a fair coin toss where 0 is heads and 1 is
tails. The expected value of $X$ is the average: $\frac{1}{2}$.
$$\begin{aligned}
\mathbb{E}[X]=0\cdot \mathbb{P}[X=0]+1\cdot \mathbb{P}[X=1]=0\cdot\frac{1}{2}+1\cdot\frac{1}{2}=\frac{1}{2}
\end{aligned}$$

We can think of the expected value in the following way: "Given that we
have assigned events in $\Omega$ the probabilities $\mathbb{P}$, what
will be the average of events we see?" In the coin toss example, we
should see heads half the time and tails half the time. Assigning these
0 and 1 respectively, we should see 0 and 1 half the time. So, the
average of things we should see is $\frac{1}{2}$.  
A couple useful properties of expectation:

- $\mathbb{E}[f(X)]=\sum\limits_xf(x)\cdot\mathbb{P}[X=x]$ for random
   variable $X$ and function $f$
- $\mathbb{E}[aX+bY]=a\mathbb{E}[X]+b\mathbb{E}[Y]$ for scalars $a,b$
   and random variables $X$ and $Y$
- $\mathbb{E}\left[\sum\limits_{i=1}^na_iX_i\right]=\sum\limits_{i=1}^na_i\mathbb{E}[X_i]$
   for scalars $a,b$ and random variables $X_i$

Coming soon:

- Indicator variables
- Erdös-Renyi model
- Probabilistic method
